---
title: Building and booting a custom Linux kernel (tutorial 02)
date: 2026-03-16 19:21:00 +/- 0300
categories: [Open Source Software Development, Linux Kernel, MAC0470]
tags: [linux, kernel, kernel-linux, kw, qemu, vm]
---

## Time to finally change something in a kernel and test it

After setting up the development environment, it was finally time customize and run a kernel inside the VM and, for that, the [tutorial](https://flusp.ime.usp.br/kernel/build-linux-for-arm-kw/) recomended a tool called `kw`.

## kw (kworkflow)

`kw` (means [kworkflow](https://kworkflow.org/)) is a open source workflow system that facilitates Linux development by offering tools and commands that simplify various common tasks, the main ones for this tutorial being building the kernel and installing modules in the VM. Installing `kw` was as easy as cloning their repository and running `setup.sh`, so the next step was to get the kernel that would be customized.

## Configurations, configurations, and configuring configurations...

As stated in the last post, the kernel used would be the Insdustrial I/O (IIO) subsystem, so to get it I also just cloned its repository, and running the command `kw init` in its top-most directory initializes local configurations for the IIO tree, so that running 
```bash
kw remote --add arm64 root@<VM-IP-address> --set-default
```
would let `kw ssh` connect to the VM, for example. Next, I set the IIO tree to have the default `arm64` build configurations (since IIO is `arm64`), and then used `kw build --menu` to edit the config file safely through a TUI to change the kernel image name. I called mine the KOOL-VERSION, because it was cooler than the normal version. Then, I configured the cross-compilation, since, unlike IIO, my machine is not `arm64`, and FINALLY ran `kw build` to build the kernel.

## Booting up the custom kernel

After what felt like hours (it was actually 40 minutes), the build process finished without any errors. I just needed to install the modules into the VM with `kw deploy modules` and...
```bash
error: kw_remote_proxy_hub.sh, ln. 147: install_modules not defined # Artistic rendition, I don`t remember the exact message
``` 
What? The tutorial warned that there would be some errors, but nothing like this! And, since the error was with the `install_modules` function, it was safe to assume that the modules were not installed. I tried to rerun the command, but the same error popped up, I even rebuild the kernel to see if it would help, but the same thing happened. Then I remembered something: `kw` is an _open source_ workflow system; I could just check what was happening in this `kw_remote_proxy_hub.sh` and, after looking around the `kw` repository, I discovered that `install_modules` was defined in `${REMOTE_KW_DEPLOY}/install.sh`, which was _not_ included in `kw_remote_proxy_hub.sh` before `install_modules` was called. Therefore, the actual fix was simple:
```bash
# kw_remote_proxy_hub.sh
...
include ${REMOTE_KW_DEPLOY}/install.sh # Added line to fix error
# shellcheck disable=SC2068
install_modules ${action_parameters[@]} # Line where error was thrown
...
```
Then, I quickly updated the `activate.sh` script, ran the VM and:
```bash
# @VM
root@localhost:~# uname --kernel-release
7.0.0-rc1-KOOL-VERSION+
```
IT WORKED! With this, I was now ready to go to the next tutorial to learn how to make custom modules.
